The enthusiast, the triumphalist's insistence that the technology works against the print is just quite wrong.
The technology is very much neutral in a way that other technologies aren't between the various forms of representation of a book.
You know, one thing that does remain to be seen is there are some suggestions here in the future of the book that, well, paper doesn't last forever, but paper does last for a couple hundred years.
Paper does last for a couple hundred years.
Nobody really knows.
I mean, it is zeros and ones when you come down to it, but nevertheless, CDs, we know, for instance, aren't forever, right?
CDs have had a very long run as these technologies go.
I mean, the assumption on the part of people who are doing this, who are either concerned with preserving the digital representations of paper books,
or the just preserving digital artifacts, whether they originally were in paper form or whether they're things like software and video games and other kinds of artifacts that have never been paper and couldn't be represented on paper, is that you're just going to have to refresh them, is the phrase, every so many years.
And part of your budget, when you did, part of the expense of digitizing them is going to be the constant cost of refreshing and making backups and making sure that
because also the representations in digital form are not that stable, so you may want to make two or three of them and so on.
The people who are working hardest on this and know most about it are the Commission on Preservation and Access in Washington.
Have you ever talked to them?
No, let's say so.
Now, Duart Linn was the head of that.
He was the guy who was at Cornell.
He left.
He was the vice chancellor for information technologies in Cornell.
It's a commission for what, once again?
A commission for preservation and access.
And this is in Washington?
They're in Washington.
And they are the ones who have taken the leading role in sort of dealing with, I mean, getting the technology right, figuring out what you really need.
Is that a governmental organization?
No, they're a private organization.
I think they're established by...
I'm not, you know, I could be wrong about this.
My impression is that they're established as a conspic consortium of university and research libraries.
And they are based in Washington.
They're based in Washington.
So if I call them.
Lynn was the director.
Yeah, I think if you call them and just say, I want to find out.
Yeah.
And they have a lot of printed materials they can get.
Good.
Excellent.
So just to wrap that up, the...
we're just going to have to keep backing them up.
And there's also the problem of just compatibility.
I mean, it isn't just a question of how long the physical media will endure.
I guess one thing that bothers me, and of course looking at it now from a literary standpoint, not the informational end and the data and all this, and that's fine, but when you talk about creative works, literary works,
There's a great concern.
How do you know the original from the copy that you get on an internet?
This whole concept of hypertext where the author really is not the author.
It's anybody who gets into the... Well, I don't know that that's true.
I think that's exaggerated.
The fact that the author... I think there are still authors of hypertext.
The way in which you... The way in which you work across the...
The artifact is different, is determined by the reader, but that's always been the case.
I mean, the fact is that somebody pointed out, I think the point's well taken, nobody ever sets down and reads Ulysses, you know, from stately plump Buck Mulligan to yes, yes, yes.
I mean, you know, nobody's ever read a book like that that way.
I mean, our experience of them is actually one of reading this, starting again, rereading the chapter, going back to Loretus, and so on.
I mean, a linear book also has this
this quality.
Yeah, but I mean, where people can actually go in and tinker with the text.
Well, that's one way.
I mean, people can or can't do that.
I don't know that that may, I mean, look, I don't, I think if you sort of ask, can there be novels?
in digital form.
Michael Joyce is one of the people who's... And he is somebody I'd like to talk to, by the way.
He's a very interesting character.
Where is he located?
He's at Vassar.
Is he?
Okay.
And are you on the web or on the net?
I am, yeah.
Okay, because I could send you some of this.
Oh, that'd be great.
I mean, you know, whether these are... He talks about interactive fictions or hyper fictions.
I've seen these things.
I haven't seen anything that blows me away, I have to say.
But, you know, I don't know that that's, you know, that that's a fair judgment now.
I don't see why there shouldn't be, there shouldn't be a medium for the expression of fiction, which isn't to say that, if you start to ask, is this a novel, that's a mug's game.
I mean, to ask whether this is the same as that and so on.
I mentioned this to Margaret Atwood, and she said, you know, what was Thomas Boldler?
I mean, he went in and rewrote Shakespeare.
She said, we have a word in the dictionary for her, Boldlerizing.
There's also, I mean, there's a kind of, I mean, the things that are interesting in this media, I have a friend who's, um,
who has done a lot of various kinds of CD-ROMs and virtual reality representations and so on of art historical.
They just did one.
He's in Rome, and they did one of the Galleria Borghese in Rome, for example.
You've got every picture in the Galleria Borghese, and you can close up or move back, and you can find information about the painters and so on and make comparisons of this painter's work and that painter's work and so on as a means of representing the catalog of an institution like that.
The CD-ROM is so much more versatile than a coffee table book, even if you're not going to... Well, there are some things.
I've been up to Corbis, by the way.
I spent a couple days up there.
I interviewed Otto Bettman down in Florida.
It's going to be a lot of fun, the people I'm bringing into this.
But I love what they did with that Leonardo Codex.
Right.
The fact is you can click on any sentence and it's in Italian written backwards and you click and it'll give you a translation.
I mean, a book is never going to do that for you.
I just had a, I mean, this is just another, well, this is another story.
I just had a, Cambridge University Press owed me a couple hundred for
some readings, you know, from referees.
Looking through the catalog and so on.
Oh, they've got Johnson's Dictionary.
I mean, I'm an electricographer first and former.
They've got Don Johnson's Dictionary and CD-ROM, and, you know, that's what I want.
It's about 200 pounds.
That was it.
Well, that's pretty good.
You know, Holt has done a book on the history of dictionaries.
Are you familiar with that?
Who's this?
No.
I want to wait one.
I'll get the book.
Hold on.
It's from Holt.
It's by Jonathan Green, J-O-N-A-T-H-O-N.
It's called Chasing the Sun, Dictionary Makers and the Dictionaries They Made.
And it's brand new.
Henry Holt.
E-N-E?
No E. It's J-O-N-A-T-H-O-N, Jonathan Green, G-R-E-N.
uh chasing the sun dictionary makers in the dictionary and it just came out about a month or so okay i'll call them since i do the fresh air things i can always get reviews yeah you should uh if you if you have trouble call me i mean they're my they're my publisher so i could order it but i i could ask them for a review and uh i could i'd be happy to have my publicist send you one too
But you really should be alert to it.
I'm interested always in books.
And this guy's a Brit.
He's England's leading lexicographer, they say, of just whatever.
You could have fooled me.
Hyperbole, thy name is a publicist, you know?
No, the other thing I was going to say, I mean, the other thing that's very interesting in this domain is this guy's doing, with Silicon Graphics and the help from the Getty Foundation, they're making virtual reality representations of various buildings, like the Basilica di San Francisco and the Inesisi, or the Tomb of Nefertari in Egypt, which are buildings...
Some of them, like the two of the other buildings you and I can't walk to anymore because our bodies change the humidity and whatever.
So, you know, maybe you can, but I can't get, you know, you have to be somebody special to get in there.
And they're also, I mean, in the virtual Vatican, for example, you can click at any point, you can see things, you can do things like that.
That's amazing, yeah, the Sistine Chapel, for instance.
You can see the Baldacchino from the top, right?
And you can see the Sistine Chapel from... Yeah, and also things like the OED.
The OED is never going to be published again.
I mean, I sit here... It's crazy to publish that.
...with an OED, and I love it, and it's physical...
And then the other thing is this virtual reality is the virtual urbanism, right?
I mean, you can restore the Rome as it was in 1400 and walk around it.
There are things you cannot represent in any other way.
And so the range of things, you know, how many are literary and how many are critical and how many have this reference function, but whatever, it remains.
enormous range of things that are being produced and will be produced in these media.
I mean, you know that.
So tell me a little bit, because I do want to write a newspaper column here.
We need a couple of live quotes on this book here.
So tell me about the conference, and this is Umberto's, this is basically ACO's group, is that right?
Well, no, no, no.
ACO, this was a series of papers done at a conference center, or at a kind of university center, but it was a study center, let me know.
that ACO has been instrumental in putting together.
But these are people...
from a wide variety of backgrounds.
I really have to fault California for not putting a page of... Don't fault California.
Fault me, and then I'll... Biographical flurbs.
And Bray Pauls will fault Aiko.
I would love to know who these people are.
I'll tell you what the story was.
This center has a relationship with this publisher called Bray Pauls, who are a Belgian Catholic publishing house.
I've never heard of them.
You've probably never heard of them, but actually $100 million a year company.
But they do things like the Patrologia Latina and so on.
And they have the right to do all the proceedings of the book, right?
And they said, we'll do it, and so on.
And then they gave it to an Italian
little company to do the page whatever, and they kept screwing up.
I got the first version of this, and all the hyphenation was done according to the Italian language.
You have to have a vowel.
To break a line, you just have to have a vowel on one each one.
Before I forget, you said Joyce is Vassar.
How about O'Donnell?
O'Donnell is at the University of Pennsylvania.
He's typical of the writers in this book.
He's a classicist by training.
who worked on Cassiothorus and Sirius and Augustine and so on.
But for some reason, like a lot of classicists, has become very much interested in the new technology.
Yeah, he'd be very good for me, I think.
He's interesting, and he is now actually director of computer systems at the University of Pennsylvania.
I'm giving a talk at Swarthmore next month.
Oh, then you should just get in touch with him, because he's got a lot to say.
And he, again, is somebody who spans the history of the book, I mean, whose interests go back to the manuscript period through the period of print and now through digital technology.
Do you have a, you know what department he's in?
He's now actually the, I'll give you his, I'll send you his email.
I'm going to give you my email address.
Yeah.
It's N-A, November Alpha, Baz Baines, B-A-S, B-A-N-E-S, at AOL.
Right.
A-O-L dot com, yeah.
Okay, I will N-A-Baz Banes, right, okay.
B-A-N-E-S.
Give me yours too.
It's number, N-U-N-B-E-R-G, at park, P-A-R-C dot Xerox dot com.
Okay.
So,
O'Donnell, a classicist.
Bolter, also a classicist.
Who's the other one?
Carla Hesse is a historian.
Oh, where is she?
She's at the University of California, Berkeley.
Damn it.
I'm coming out again anyway.
Right.
She's very interesting as well.
I mean, these are all people.
I love the book, believe me.
I think she's an interesting person to talk to.
I mean, she's got a very... She edited a book on future libraries that UC Press did.
I have it.
Okay.
It also comes out of this sort of rich culture.
I mean, I think there's a sense in which...
The people, on the one hand, the enthusiasts of the technology are really quite ignorant for the most part of the history.
They invoke Gutenberg and so on, but in a kind of third-hand way.
Well, I thought Sven Birkitz's book didn't help anybody.
I mean, I didn't care for the book particularly.
I mean, I thought it was kind of cranky and not very... I mean, if you know my book at all, people would think I'm diametrically opposed to this future stuff.
I'm just not.
I mean, nobody's more wired than me.
No, I mean, I think we're all like that.
I mean, at a certain point, I mean, you know, we're all saying, give me a break.
I mean, you know, I don't have to make this choice.
I mean, I'm sitting in a room full of books, right, and I'm sure you are, too.
And, you know, we've also got three screens within four feet of me.
You know, we've got three computers in the house, and I was thinking, everyone is essential.
I mean, we're using them all at all times.
I mean, you know, I want to be able to, I'm just doing that little, in that article of mine, which I'm not that happy with, but the...
You know, the idea of being able to look in Jane Austen and say, how many times has Jane Austen used the word information and how does she use it?
It's the kind of question that we couldn't have asked before the
before the technology development.
And it can even have a strong... It's a dissertation topic.
Yeah, go into Shakespeare.
How many times, because it was all language, go into Midsummer Night's Dream.
How often does he use the word moon or moonshine?
Right, now that was available always in the... That was, and then the... Laboriously compiled... Which I have, Spivex Concordance, which is... But you couldn't make those for all, right?
I mean, again, for lexicography... That took him 25 years to do, though, just Shakespeare, I think it did.
I have to tell you, when we were preparing new versions of the American Heritage Dictionary, the idea, you know, it used to be you had to have these huge files of citations, as with the OED, right?
If I want to find, if I'm interested in a new word or a new use of a word, I can just go on to Dialogue or on to Nexus and just pull down, you know, a couple hundred cites.
And it just makes sense enormously.
You know, I see something new and I just grab it down off the way.
Now, you're going to send me some stuff at AOL, right?
Right.
If you have anything on how I could reach O'Donnell and Joyce.
Okay.
You want to reach O'Donnell?
I'd be happy to reach Carla as well.
Joyce.
They really interest me, yeah.
Anybody else?
Well, Bolter is an interesting character.
I'll send you him.
He's also a classicist.
He's at the center at the University of Georgia.
Well, I love classicists.
I just love the whole concept of... Well, my sense is that these guys, these guys tend to fetishize the object less than the rest of us do because their texts have always been, you know, at second hand and third hand.
I mean, they never, you know, they never had the papyri and whatever.
So their texts have already survived several transformations of...
of technology.
Give me a knockout quote that'll give me a lead for this newspaper piece.
Well, I mean, let's say we're on the eve of a new millennium here, which is part of the subtitle of my new book.
What do you say about books and book culture and the future of the book?
A general quote.
Well, I mean, one line I've used, I don't know, is that the future
The future is always interesting... I'll give you this.
The future is always interesting both for... What in anticipation is always most interesting about the future is how different it will be.
And that's perhaps why people have focused on the new technologies of reading.
In retrospect, what's no less interesting is just how much the future remains the same.
And I think what will be most striking to us...
in the middle of the 21st century is just how pervasive the printed book will remain.
Perhaps not exactly in the form we're familiar with, perhaps distributed in other ways, perhaps advertised in other ways, but nonetheless, the 21st century may very well be the century of the book.
That's fascinating.
Do that again?
You think so?
What's most interesting about a writer like Wells is not just that he was able to predict a lot of the technological marbles of the
of the 20th century, which, after all, any number of second-rate writers of the late 19th and early 20th centuries were able to do, but that he was able to envision them in a world in which men are still wearing bow ties.
That's great.
I have to tell you, I'd never heard of this Trithemius before, a fascinating character.
I tried to get that book at the Athenaeum.
They didn't have it, so I have to buy a new reading ticket at Harvard right now.
I was hoping I could do this without buying a reading ticket.
Donald has a web page.
He does?
Yeah, and he's got a lot of stuff.
He's got indications of where a lot of the classical stuff could be found.
So what, do I just punch up?
Why don't you just do a search for O'Donnell?
Yeah, if you do a search for James O'Donnell, it will come up.
I will send you his email.
I mean, I'll send you emails for all these people.
Oh, great.
But the...
Also, it's a small corpus.
All of the Greek stuff, all of the classical Greek stuff we have, you can get onto one or two CD-ROMs.
It's not like the 19th century, which is endless, and there's all this ephemera.
It's not like the Alexandrian Library exists in total.
It's a small corpus, and so they can just put it onto CD-ROM, and they can have all of their corpus they can carry around in a brief while.
So the class is, in a certain sense, way ahead of the rest of us.
those who were steeped in these historical periods of the 19th centuries, all these folks.
They're classists, they don't give a shit.
Can you recommend any people at the MIT Media Lab, I should say?
Well, I don't know the people there very well.
I mean, Negroponte's the... He's the big guy, yeah.
I'm trying to think if there's anybody else you really want to know.
What's your interest?
I'm just interested in learning, going over and seeing.
I mean, I understand.
There's a guy I think very highly of, who's very sensible about this.
And I think if you want to know anything about digital libraries, he's the guy I would talk to.
His name is Cliff Lynch, L-Y-N-C-H.
I've heard his name before.
And he's at the University of California Office of the President.
I'll write him down and I'll send you his email.
Okay, okay.
And he does all the digital library material for them.
But he's also very...
Like a lot of people who are trained in libraries, he's not going to make the mistake of thinking that this is going to be simple.
He understands how complicated it is and how important printed things are.
He also understands some of the economic changes that are going on
in distribution as we go towards digitization.
The leading edge here is not in the kinds of books we've been talking about.
It's in things like scientific journals.
Which is what Stanford is doing.
Have you talked to Vicki Reich there?
Is she Mike's assistant?
I did talk briefly with a woman there.
They're the ones who are doing, I forget the name of the project they're doing.
Yeah, I did talk to her.
The digitizing, the... The scientific.
The science, yeah.
But it's also, I mean, there's a guy, the other person is a guy named Richard Lucier, L-U-C-I-E-R, who is at the UCSF, University of California, San Francisco Libraries, which is the medical school that corresponds to Berkeley.
And they, I mean, Cliff Lynch will put you onto this stuff, but they are aggressively pursuing these various kinds of arrangements with the publishers.
Because, I mean, nobody wants these.
Lynch is at Berkeley?
Lynch is at the University of California Office of the President, which is the office that handles these things for all of these.
But that's located in Berkeley, right?
They're located in Oakland, I think.
They're in Oakland.
But they, for all of the different, you know, UCLA and Berkeley and Davis.
So they handle that for all the UCLA.
But he's in the Office of the President.
He's in the Office of the President.
But he's also involved in these negotiations with publishers.
He has a sense of how it's going to pan out.
It's going to be very different.
Now you'll subscribe.
The negotiations will be handled at that level.
Let's say if you want a journal that's digitally available from Elsevier,
it will come, the negotiations will be between Elsevier and the University of California.
And they'll sell just a license to the University of California.
How do you feel about these colleges and universities, Fort Ord comes to mind, where they actually planned an institution without a library and the plans?
Yeah, I think that's very dangerous.
And I think one of the most dangerous things about all this talk, this Yammer, wired type Yammer, is that it encourages
people to think that they can get away without physical libraries on the one hand and without subsidizing.
I mean, the university presses are really suffering from this because in an age of shrinking university budgets, the presidents look around and say, where are we going to make cuts?
Ooh, here's this university press.
We're subsidizing them to the tune of 25 to 50 percent of their budget.
Let's just get rid of that.
And they'll go online.
They'll figure out a way to do this.
And those publishers are really suffering.
And on the other hand, libraries.
I mean, you know, a lot of people are, you know, for all there are these new library projects that you were mentioning.
My sense is that universities are not spending a lot of money on libraries.
And the assumption is, well, we don't need a new library.
Now, I got some mail about this a while ago from somebody at a university.
I believe the University of West Virginia, but don't quote me on that.
where the president basically said, well, we don't want to spend money on the library.
We won't need this in a little while.
Jeez.
UVA?
You understand these guys.
They're not attending to the budget pressures.
They're desperate for ways to save money, and they don't get it.
I won't quote you on this.
Was this printed?
Was this published?
I got this... I mean, is there a source for this?
No, I received a letter from...
Oh, God.
I probably have it in an email file somewhere.
I received a letter from somebody at this university.
Because I would just call the guy.
I mean, in the way I... Well, it's also, I mean, there's that... If I can send you... Let me see, info about West Virginia.
There was the Indiana story...
The Indiana University, do you remember there was an IBM ad?
No.
That showed, there was one of these series of international IBM ads.
You know, they show the two old... Oh, sure, sure.
Yeah, the guy's getting everything.
And there was one of an old... The old guy.
He's from his vineyard in Italy.
And he's doing his research.
He's doing his PhD in the University of Indiana.
They have their whole library online, right?
Which is not true.
Well, it turns out what Indiana actually has online...
is some number of collect books, manuscripts from its music collection, period.
And the idea that, I mean, and the ad really made it, did not make it, you know, evident that this was just some, and then the guy said, well, yeah, it's just a matter of scaling it up, right, which it isn't.
I mean, as you know, there's a big difference between digitizing a small collection and digitizing, you know, Indiana probably has a million books in its library.
It probably is more than that.
So, I mean, it's only as big as Stanford.
So there's a lot of this going on, and that again leads to the assumption that this is just a matter of time.
Cliff Lynch is always railing about this assumption
we can, you know, that it's just a matter of time, and all that stuff is almost available, and we really don't need libraries anymore, and so on.
I mean, there's a lot of that going around, and it's very pernicious and annoying.
And it doesn't help.
It's very bad for public relations stuff, right?
Right.
Especially when you don't even call the place a library.
They call it an information resources.
Right.
We have, you know, at J.S.
Park, we have a technical information center, right, which we call it a technical.
And I understand that.
I mean, there, you know, these people, you know, we don't have that kind of resources.
Yeah.
Well, listen, I think it's diminishing returns after an hour.
Yeah, okay.
Well, listen, thanks a lot.
But I'd like to talk to you again if it's okay.
I will send you, sure.
I will send you.
Well, it was interesting to talk to you, so I got going on this.
Oh, I appreciate it.
I will send you this information, and with it will be my...
full affiliation and address and so on.
I hope you'll send me a copy of the piece when it appears.
Absolutely.
Well, why don't you give me an address?
Well, what I'll do is I'll just put it on the... Oh, okay, good.
Okay.
Good, good.
Yeah, and it'll be pretty quick, so, you know, the next couple weeks, let's say.
Okay.
I'll look forward to seeing you, and good luck with this other thing, and I'll send you these addresses.
I really appreciate it.
Okay.
Thanks a lot.